---
layout: post
title: "How to Practice Effectively"
tags: [tutorial, opinion]
featured: true
usemathjax: true
---

How should I practice? This is a question that everyone has asked at some point in their CP career and has differing opinions on. And today, I will also be throwing my hat in the ring.

For starters, what are the components of being good at CP? I would break it down into three parts:

## Knowledge

It goes without saying that a certain threshold of knowledge needs to be reached for each rating level. If you don't know what a [segment tree](https://cp-algorithms.com/data_structures/segment_tree.html) is, it's unlikely that you will solve a problem requiring a segment tree, unless you're able to reinvent the data structure yourself. But the actual amount of knowledge you need depends on which platform you're competing on. If you're competing on Codeforces, you honestly don't need anything harder than a segment tree to reach at least master, maybe even higher. Many problems on Codeforces Div 2 ABC, sometimes even D or E depending on the author, require no algorithmic/DS knowledge at all. Your intuition and thinking abilities will take you much further than any algorithm or data structure will. On the other hand, many OI contests like USACO (USA Computing Olympiad) tend to deploy more algorithmic knowledge in their problems. USACO in particular almost requires certain algorithms/DS to pass each division, and while it doesn't have an official syllabus, you can refer to [usaco.guide](https://usaco.guide/) to see which algorithms/DS show up frequently in each division.

It's also worth noting that knowledge isn't just limited to algorithms/DS. CP problems will often contain certain "tricks" that you might see frequently. For example, it's a well-known fact that the sum of harmonic series, $\frac{1}{1} + \frac{1}{2} + \dots + \frac{1}{n}$, is bounded under $\mathcal O(\log n)$. A simple proof of that is to consider rounding denominators down to their nearest power of $2$ instead:

$$
\frac{1}{1} + \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{3} + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{5} + \dots + \frac{1}{n} < \frac{1}{1} + \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{4} + \dots + \frac{1}{2^{\lfloor\log_2{n}\rfloor}} \leq {\lfloor\log_2{n}\rfloor} + 1
$$

The last step of that inequality was noting that we essentially have $\mathcal O(\log n)$ copies of $1$. This fact is used in many problems to prove a better complexity for brute forcing all multiples of all numbers less than $n$ (such as [this one](https://codeforces.com/contest/1541/problem/B)).
